Paper: OptiMask (#1089)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/cyril_joly/main.md

---
# Ensure that this title is the same as the one in `myst.yml`  
title: "OptiMask: Efficiently Finding the Largest NaN-Free Submatrix"  
abstract: |  

>   When working with tabular data, many processes cannot handle missing values. While imputation strategies are commonly used, another approach is to extract a NaN-free submatrix. Simply dropping every row or column containing NaN values can drastically reduce the dataset, potentially leaving no usable data. OptiMask is a heuristic designed to solve the following optimization problem: identifying the largest (in terms of the number of elements) not necessarily contiguous submatrix without missing data. OptiMask determines the sets of rows and columns to remove from the input matrix, providing either an exact or near-optimal solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  When working with tabular data, many processes cannot handle missing values. While imputation strategies are commonly used, another approach is to extract a NaN-free submatrix. Simply dropping every row or column containing NaN values can drastically reduce the dataset, potentially leaving no usable data. OptiMask is a heuristic designed to solve the following optimization problem: identifying the submatrix of maximum size (in terms of the number of elements) without missing values. This submatrix is composed of rows and columns that are not necessarily contiguous in the original data. OptiMask determines the sets of rows and columns to remove from the input matrix, providing either an exact or near-optimal submatrix.
```
The distinction between contiguous and non-contiguous submatrices was unclear. The algorithm section describes permuting rows and columns to form a single, contiguous submatrix, but the abstract states that the optimal submatrix is not necessarily contiguous. This apparent contradiction required a second reading to understand.

Author: You're right!

---

## Introduction  

> Missing data is a common challenge in data analysis, often represented as NaN (Not a Number) values in matrices or DataFrames. Many algorithms and statistical methods require complete datasets, necessitating effective handling of missing values [@little2019statistical; @rubin2004multiple]. Traditional approaches include imputation (replacing missing values with estimates) or complete-case analysis (discarding rows/columns with any NaN) [@schafer1997analysis; @van2018flexible]. However, imputation can introduce bias [@white2011multiple], while complete-case analysis may discard excessive data, especially when missing values are widespread [@enders2010applied].  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Missing data is a common challenge in data analysis, often represented as NaN (Not a Number) values in matrices or DataFrames. Many algorithms and statistical methods require complete datasets, necessitating effective handling of missing values [@little2019statistical; @rubin2004multiple]. Traditional approaches include imputation (replacing missing values with estimates) and complete-case analysis (discarding rows/columns with any NaN) [@schafer1997analysis; @van2018flexible]. However, imputation can introduce bias [@white2011multiple], while complete-case analysis may discard excessive data, especially when missing values are widespread [@enders2010applied].  
```

Very minor comment, but I think "and" is more appropriate than "or" here... both imputation AND complete-case analysis are approaches.

Also... would you please consider breaking this file up into 1 sentence per line? Markdown renderers treat consecutive non-empty lines the same way that they treat 1 long sentence... sentences will be combined into a single paragraph, with wrapping, correct indentation, etc.

Having shorter lines makes the git diff easier to read and review.

> Missing data is a common challenge in data analysis, often represented as NaN (Not a Number) values in matrices or DataFrames. Many algorithms and statistical methods require complete datasets, necessitating effective handling of missing values [@little2019statistical; @rubin2004multiple]. Traditional approaches include imputation (replacing missing values with estimates) or complete-case analysis (discarding rows/columns with any NaN) [@schafer1997analysis; @van2018flexible]. However, imputation can introduce bias [@white2011multiple], while complete-case analysis may discard excessive data, especially when missing values are widespread [@enders2010applied].  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Missing data is a common challenge in data analysis, often represented as NaN (Not a Number) values in matrices or DataFrames. Many algorithms and statistical methods require complete datasets, necessitating effective handling of missing values [@little2019statistical; @rubin2004multiple]. Traditional approaches include imputation (replacing missing values with estimates) or complete-case analysis (discarding rows/columns with any NaN) [@schafer1997analysis; @van2018flexible]. However, imputation can introduce bias [@white2011multiple], while complete-case analysis may discard excessive data, especially when missing values are evenly distributed[@enders2010applied].  
```
Did you mean to say (evenly distributed, or unevenly distributed), or simply that there are many NaN cells?

> An alternative strategy is to identify the largest possible submatrix without missing values, preserving the original data unaltered. This reduces to an optimization task: remove the minimal set of rows and columns to yield a NaN-free submatrix of maximum size (i.e., maximizing the product of its dimensions).  

Reviewer: I don't know what this means, "(i.e., maximizing the product of its dimensions)." 
Maybe it can be removed.

> An alternative strategy is to identify the largest possible submatrix without missing values, preserving the original data unaltered. This reduces to an optimization task: remove the minimal set of rows and columns to yield a NaN-free submatrix of maximum size (i.e., maximizing the product of its dimensions).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative strategy is to identify the largest possible NaN-free submatrix, while preserving as much of the original, unaltered data as possible. This reduces to an optimization task: remove the minimal set of rows and columns to yield a NaN-free submatrix of maximum size.  
```
Some suggested edits for clarity.

> This problem is computationally challenging, as the search space grows exponentially with the number of rows and columns containing NaN. Exact solutions (e.g., linear programming) guarantee optimality but are intractable for large matrices. Heuristic methods like OptiMask provide near-optimal solutions efficiently.  

Reviewer 2: Are exact solutions actually "intractable" (difficult to control / program)?

If instead you just mean that they require significant resources (time, memory, compute, etc.), I would change this to something like "Exact solutions (e.g. linear programming) are prohibitively expensive".

---

As this is the first time in the paper that OptiMask is being introduced, I think the second sentence should be re-written to begin "OptiMask is...".

For example:

```text
OptiMask is a heuristic method which closely, efficiently approximates these exact solutions.
```

> This problem is computationally challenging, as the search space grows exponentially with the number of rows and columns containing NaN. Exact solutions (e.g., linear programming) guarantee optimality but are intractable for large matrices. Heuristic methods like OptiMask provide near-optimal solutions efficiently.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This problem is computationally challenging, as the search space grows exponentially with the number of rows and columns containing NaN. Exact solutions (e.g., linear programming) guarantee optimality but are intractable for large matrices.   
```
Better to move the final OptiMask sentence to the next paragraph.

> OptiMask iteratively permutes rows and columns to isolate NaN values along a frontier, simplifying the search for the largest contiguous NaN-free submatrix. By combining randomization with multiple restarts, it reliably finds high-quality solutions. This paper explores OptiMask’s algorithm, theoretical foundations, and practical performance across diverse datasets, including large and structured matrices.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OptiMask iteratively permutes rows and columns to isolate NaN values along a frontier, simplifying the search for the largest contiguous NaN-free submatrix. By combining randomization with multiple restarts, it reliably finds high-quality solutions. This paper explores the OptiMask algorithm, theoretical foundations, and practical performance across diverse datasets, including large and structured matrices. It also discusses the `optimask` Python package (https://pypi.org/project/optimask/), which enables applying the algorithm to matrix-like data structures popular with Python programmers.
```

Because this is a paper in the proceedings of a Python conference, I don't think we should allow readers to get this far into the paper wondering "what does this have to do with Python?".

Here in the introduction (and maybe also briefly in the abstract?), I think it'd be helpful to address that directly.

> OptiMask iteratively permutes rows and columns to isolate NaN values along a frontier, simplifying the search for the largest contiguous NaN-free submatrix. By combining randomization with multiple restarts, it reliably finds high-quality solutions. This paper explores OptiMask’s algorithm, theoretical foundations, and practical performance across diverse datasets, including large and structured matrices.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Heuristic methods like OptiMask provide near-optimal solutions efficiently. OptiMask iteratively permutes rows and columns to isolate NaN values along a frontier, simplifying the search for the largest contiguous NaN-free submatrix. By combining randomization with multiple restarts, it reliably finds high-quality solutions. This paper explores OptiMask’s algorithm, theoretical foundations, and practical performance across diverse datasets, including large and structured matrices.  
```

## Problem Formalization and Challenges  

### Mathematical Definition  

Given an $ m \times n $ matrix $ A $ with missing values (NaN), the goal is to find:  

- A subset of rows $ \mathcal{R} \subseteq \{1, \dots, m\} $ and columns $ \mathcal{C} \subseteq \{1, \dots, n\} $ such that the submatrix $ A[\mathcal{R}, \mathcal{C}] $ contains no NaN values.  
- The solution maximizing the size $ |\mathcal{R}| \times |\mathcal{C}| $ of the submatrix.  

### The Fundamental Trade-off  

When handling missing values in a matrix, we must decide whether to remove affected rows, columns, or a combination of both. The optimal choice depends on the matrix's dimensions and NaN distribution:  

1. **Single NaN Case**:  

>    - In tall matrices (rows > columns), removing the problematic row typically preserves more data.  
>    - In wide matrices (columns > rows), removing the affected column is usually preferable.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - In tall matrices (`rows > columns`), removing the problematic row typically preserves more data.  
   - In wide matrices (`columns > rows`), removing the affected column is usually preferable.  
```

I think these expressions should be marked up as inline code, for clarity.

- Decision variables for $i \in \{1, \dots, m\}$ and $j \in \{1, \dots, n\}$:  
  - $r_i \in \{0,1\}$: 1 if row $i$ is removed, 0 otherwise.  
  - $c_j \in \{0,1\}$: 1 if column $j$ is removed, 0 otherwise.  
  - $e_{i,j} \in \{0,1\}$: 1 if cell $(i,j)$ is effectively removed (i.e., part of a removed row or column), 0 otherwise.  

**Constraints:**  

For all $i \in \{1, \dots, m\}$ and $j \in \{1, \dots, n\}$:  

- If $a_{i,j}$ is NaN, then $e_{i,j} = 1$.  
- $r_i + c_j \geq e_{i,j}$.  
- $e_{i,j} \geq r_i$.  
- $e_{i,j} \geq c_j$.  

**Objective Function:**  

Minimize the total number of effectively removed cells:  

$$
\min \sum_{i=1}^{m} \sum_{j=1}^{n} e_{i,j}  
$$  

This formulation can be solved using integer linear programming solvers (e.g., GLPK [@makhorin2012glpk], Gurobi [@gurobi2023gurobi], CPLEX [@cplex2009v12]), often interfaced via modeling languages like Pyomo [@hart2017pyomo] or PuLP [@mitchell2011pulp] in Python for data science practiotioners. However, its primary disadvantage is computational cost: for an $m \times n$ matrix, the formulation uses $m \times n + m + n$ binary variables, which becomes prohibitive for large matrices.

## Algorithm  

> OptiMask is a heuristic designed to provide high-quality (and sometimes optimal) solutions to the problem. The core idea is to compute row and column permutations such that the search for the largest non-contiguous NaN-free submatrix reduces to finding a contiguous one.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OptiMask is a heuristic designed to provide near-approximations of the optimal solutions to the problem. The core idea is to compute row and column permutations such that the search for the largest non-contiguous NaN-free submatrix reduces to finding a contiguous one.  
```

Would you consider changing language like "high-quality" to "near-approximations" or similar? I think it a bit more directly describes what's happening here.

The word "approximation" does not appear anywhere in the paper, but it seems to me that that is what's happening. I think that when this is thought of as an approximation of "exact" solutions, the relationship between the trade-offs and heuristics becomes a bit clearer.

### Core Approach  

:::{figure} figures/algo_data  
:alt: Data to process  
:width: 400 px
:align: left
An example matrix illustrating the algorithm's steps. Grey cells represent missing values.  
:::  

OptiMask employs an iterative permutation-based algorithm to identify the largest NaN-free submatrix through these key steps:  

1. **Problem Reduction**:  

>    - Isolate rows and columns containing at least one NaN value (rows or columns without NaNs are preserved, as there is no reason to remove them).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Isolate rows and columns containing at least one NaN value. (Rows or columns without NaNs are preserved, as there is no reason to remove them.)  
```
I've edited the sentence a bit to make a complete sentence fall within the ( ), and move the period to inside the ).  I think this may be slightly preferred..

   - Create a boolean mask matrix where True represents NaN positions.  

2. **Frontier Detection**:  

>    - Compute `hx`: column-wise highest NaN index (from the bottom).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Compute `hx`: column-wise, NaN cell with highest row index (i.e., furthest bottom).  
   - Compute `hy`: row-wise, NaN cell with highest column index (i.e., furthest right).  
   - These define the current "NaN frontier" of the matrix.  
```
This part is confusing. Some suggestions.  Also a diagram of index values may help.  
```
    figure: (hx, hy) coordinate system 

    (0, 0) ---------- (0, 1) 
      |                 |
      |                 |
      |                 |
    (1, 0) ---------- (1, 1) 
```

   - Compute `hy`: row-wise rightmost NaN index (from the left).  
   - These define the current "NaN frontier" of the matrix.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_0  
   :alt: Step #1 and #2  
   :width: 400 px
   :align: left
   Steps #1 and #2: isolating rows and columns with NaNs and computing `hx` and `hy`.  
   :::  

3. **Permutation Phase**:  

>    - Alternately sort rows and columns to push NaN values toward a Pareto frontier.  

Reviewer 2: I read this and found myself thinking "so does OptiMask not preserve sort ordering of the rows and columns?"

That could be a problem for using this to pre-process training data for many types of machine learning algorithms, for example. I think it'd be very helpful to prevent that type of question by clarifying here what guarantees OptiMask makes about the sort order of the output.

For example, if the 9th and 10th columns of the input matrix are both preserved in the output matrix, will they appear in that order (even if they are no longer 9th and 10th specifically, because "earlier" columns were removed)?

Author: Indeed, Optimask does preserve the original ordering of rows and columns: the `solve` method provides `rows` and `cols`, the indices of the retained rows and columns, and these two iterables are sorted. I'll clarify it !

Reviewer 2: Oh very cool!

Thanks for adding that in https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/1089/commits/7af86fdb9f5b6a51bf9f2b52f5df3ee3935f6a5b

   - Odd iterations: Sort rows by descending `hy`.  
   - Track all permutations applied during this process.  
   - Repeat until both `hx` and `hy` form non-increasing sequences, indicating an optimal NaN frontier.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_iterations  
   :alt: Permutation steps  
   :width: 800 px
   :align: left
   Three alternate permutations lead to a Pareto frontier of NaNs.  
   :::  

4. **Submatrix Extraction**:  
   - Identify the largest contiguous NaN-free rectangle in the permuted space.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_result_permuted_space  
   :alt: OptiMask result in permuted space  
   :width: 400 px
   :align: left
   OptiMask result in permuted space: the black-dotted rectangles are candidates for the largest contiguous NaN-free submatrix, with the red-dotted one selected for its maximal area.  
   :::  

   - Apply inverse permutations to map back to original row/column indices.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_result.png
   :alt: OptiMask result  
   :width: 400 px
   :align: left
   OptiMask result: red indicates removed rows and columns, blue marks the computed NaN-free submatrix.  
   :::  

## Python Package  

> The algorithm is available on PyPI and conda-forge and can be used as follows:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Python implementation of the algorithm is available on PyPI (https://pypi.org/project/optimask/) and conda-forge (https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/optimask) and can be used as follows:  
```

The Python package is not "the algorithm"... it's *a Python implementation of the algorithm*.

I also think "on PyPI and conda-forge" should be links... you haven't mentioned anywhere else in the paper what the distribution name of the package is (i.e., what name I should pass to `pip install`).

```python  

> from optimask.utils import generate_mar  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import numpy as np
from optimask.utils import generate_mar  
```

These code samples should be completely self-contained. This one is missing a `numpy` import.

from optimask import OptiMask  

# Generate a Missing At Random matrix with 2% NaN values  
x = generate_mar(m=100_000, n=1_000, ratio=0.02)  
rows, cols = OptiMask().solve(x)  
np.isnan(x[rows, cols]).any()  

> # False  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# False  
print(f"optimal sub-matrix: {rows} rows, {cols} cols")
```

I think it'd be helpful to show an example here of the dimensions of the sub-matrix. I understand that that number will changed based on the shape and distribution of the data, but it'd be helpful to be able to see. I have a rough idea in my head of how large the optimal matrix might be given that the input is (100,000, 1,000) and 2% of values are missing.

```  

> This computation takes approximately ~200ms on an average personal computer. The package supports NumPy arrays [@harris2020array], pandas DataFrames [@mckinney2010data], and Polars DataFrames [@vink2023polars], leveraging Numba [@lam2015numba] for speed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This computation takes approximately ~200ms on an average personal computer. The library uses Numba [@lam2015numba] for speed, and accepts inputs several popular input formats, including NumPy arrays [@harris2020array], pandas DataFrames [@mckinney2010data], and Polars DataFrames [@vink2023polars].
```

For slightly easier-to-follow parallel structure, I'd move `numbe` up to the beginning of this sentence.

> This computation takes approximately ~200ms on an average personal computer. The package supports NumPy arrays [@harris2020array], pandas DataFrames [@mckinney2010data], and Polars DataFrames [@vink2023polars], leveraging Numba [@lam2015numba] for speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This computation takes approximately 200ms on an average personal computer. The package supports NumPy arrays [@harris2020array], pandas DataFrames [@mckinney2010data], and Polars DataFrames [@vink2023polars], leveraging Numba [@lam2015numba] for speed.
```

## Conclusion

> OptiMask provides a scalable heuristic for finding the largest NaN-free submatrix in large datasets where exact methods like linear programming become computationally impractical. By strategically permuting rows and columns to isolate missing values, it offers a practical solution that preserves maximal data without imputation. The implementation supports common data structures (NumPy, pandas, Polars) and delivers results efficiently even for big matrices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OptiMask provides a scalable heuristic for finding the largest NaN-free submatrix in large datasets where exact methods like linear programming become computationally impractical. By strategically permuting rows and columns to isolate missing values, it offers a practical solution that preserves maximal data without imputation. The Python implementation supports common data structures (NumPy, pandas, Polars) and delivers results efficiently even for big matrices.
```

> OptiMask provides a scalable heuristic for finding the largest NaN-free submatrix in large datasets where exact methods like linear programming become computationally impractical. By strategically permuting rows and columns to isolate missing values, it offers a practical solution that preserves maximal data without imputation. The implementation supports common data structures (NumPy, pandas, Polars) and delivers results efficiently even for big matrices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OptiMask provides a scalable heuristic for finding the largest NaN-free submatrix in large datasets where exact methods like linear programming become computationally impractical. By strategically permuting rows and columns to isolate missing values, it offers a practical solution that preserves maximal data without imputation. The implementation supports common data structures (NumPy, pandas, Polars) and delivers results efficiently even for large matrices.
```
More formal and consistent with other use cases.

> Future work will explore theoretical guarantees on the approximation quality and extensions to weighted optimization problems. The implementation will continue to be optimized for speed in subsequent versions. Finally, an OptiMask-based algorithm for tabular imputation will be developed and benchmarked against MICE to evaluate whether it can achieve better or faster results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Future work will explore theoretical guarantees on the approximation quality and extensions to weighted optimization problems. The implementation will continue to be optimized for speed in subsequent versions. Finally, an OptiMask-based algorithm for tabular imputation will be developed and benchmarked against Multiple Imputation by Chained Equations ("MICE") to evaluate whether it can achieve better or faster results.
```

Every acronym should be defined the first time it is used. I think MICE also should have a citation (I think it's https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v045i03).

Reviewer: I concur with jameslamb's suggestions, 
MICE (Multiple Imputation by Chained Equations)[fn]
---
footnote: https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v045i03).

> Future work will explore theoretical guarantees on the approximation quality and extensions to weighted optimization problems. The implementation will continue to be optimized for speed in subsequent versions. Finally, an OptiMask-based algorithm for tabular imputation will be developed and benchmarked against MICE to evaluate whether it can achieve better or faster results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Future work will explore theoretical guarantees on the approximation quality and extensions to weighted optimization problems. The implementation will continue to be optimized for speed in subsequent versions. Finally, an OptiMask-based algorithm for tabular imputation will be developed and benchmarked against MICE (Multiple Imputation by Chained Equations)[fn] to evaluate whether it can achieve better or faster results.
```
footnote: https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v045i03).

I concur with jameslamb's suggestions.
Comment status is resolved, but I do not see the acronym definition or citation.

Reviewer 3: @CyrilJl - have these minor edits been made? Please confirm, or make them by EOD today (09/10/2025)

Author: Yes, I confirm that these edits have been made.

> ## Aknowledgements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgements
```
Spelling

3. **Permutation Phase**:  
   - Alternately sort rows and columns to push NaN values toward a Pareto frontier.  
   - Even iterations: Sort columns by descending `hx`.  
   - Odd iterations: Sort rows by descending `hy`.  
   - Track all permutations applied during this process.  
   - Repeat until both `hx` and `hy` form non-increasing sequences, indicating an optimal NaN frontier.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_iterations  
   :alt: Permutation steps  
   :width: 800 px
   :align: left
   Three alternate permutations lead to a Pareto frontier of NaNs.  
   :::  

4. **Submatrix Extraction**:  
   - Identify the largest contiguous NaN-free rectangle in the permuted space.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_result_permuted_space  
   :alt: OptiMask result in permuted space  
   :width: 400 px
   :align: left
   OptiMask result in permuted space: the black-dotted rectangles are candidates for the largest contiguous NaN-free submatrix, with the red-dotted one selected for its maximal area.  
   :::  

   - Apply inverse permutations to map back to original row/column indices.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_result.png
   :alt: OptiMask result  
   :width: 400 px
   :align: left

>    OptiMask result: red indicates removed rows and columns, blue marks the computed NaN-free submatrix.  

Reviewer 2: The description of the algorithm and the previous figures are very good... I know very little about this topic but feel like I was able to understand the description pretty well!

I was confused by this last figure though. For all of the preceding discussion, red was used to mean "NaN". Changing the meaning of the color makes it harder to understand this final figure, in my opinion.

Would you please consider adjusting this, so the colors have the same meaning throughout the paper? Something like:

* red = NaN
* blue = non-NaN
* gray = non-Nan, but removed because its row/column were removed

Reviewer 2: And please update this image caption with a description of what the gray boxes represent.

Author: You're right. I'll modify my plot function to be able to have the changes you suggest.

Reviewer 2: Looks like this was resolved in recent commits, thanks! This thread could be resolved.

   :::  

## Python Package  

A Python implementation of the algorithm is available on PyPI (<https://pypi.org/project/optimask/>) and conda-forge (<https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/optimask>) and can be used as follows:

```python
import numpy as np
from optimask import OptiMask
from optimask.utils import generate_mar

# Generate a Missing At Random matrix with 2% NaN values
x = generate_mar(m=100_000, n=1_000, ratio=0.02)
rows, cols = OptiMask().solve(x)
np.isnan(x[np.ix_(rows, cols)]).any()  # False

> len(rows), len(cols)  # (38031, 48)

Reviewer 2: In the introduction, it says:

> _Many algorithms and statistical methods require complete datasets, necessitating effective handling of missing values_

I think readers' understanding of this project would really be improved by expanding this example slightly to use one of those algorithms.

For example, something like:

* create missing-at-random dataset
* pass it through `optimask` to get the submatrix with 0 missing values
* train some `scikit-learn` model type that requires input data without NaNs
* show how to use the `optimask` outputs to:
  - subset the training data down to the submatrix
  - subset a new, different dataset (assume no NAs) to the same set of columns and call `predict()` or `transform()` on it

Up to you, I could also understand if you thought this was too distracting.

For me personally, it wasn't clear at first that this software would return arrays of indices... I expected it to maybe return a `numpy` array or something pointing to the actual content of the sub-matrix.

To be clear... returning the indices is great! That makes this library portable to lots of different type of data structures. I'm just suggesting here expanding the code sample a bit to make that usage pattern clearer.

Author: You're right, I'll write a complete example.

The python implementation proposes two options, returning the rows and columns indices (default option), or returning directly the submatrix:
```python
# x a numpy array / pandas DataFrame / polars DataFrame with missing values
rows, cols = Optimask().solve(x)
sub_x = Optimask().solve(x, return_data=True)
```

## Problem Formalization and Challenges  

### Mathematical Definition  

Given an $ m \times n $ matrix $ A $ with missing values (NaN), the goal is to find:  

- A subset of rows $ \mathcal{R} \subseteq \{1, \dots, m\} $ and columns $ \mathcal{C} \subseteq \{1, \dots, n\} $ such that the submatrix $ A[\mathcal{R}, \mathcal{C}] $ contains no NaN values.  
- The solution maximizing the size $ |\mathcal{R}| \times |\mathcal{C}| $ of the submatrix.  

### The Fundamental Trade-off  

When handling missing values in a matrix, we must decide whether to remove affected rows, columns, or a combination of both. The optimal choice depends on the matrix's dimensions and the distribution of NaN values:  

1. **Toy Example**:  
   - In **tall matrices** (rows > columns), removing a problematic **row** typically preserves more data.  
   - In **wide matrices** (columns > rows), removing an affected **column** is usually preferable.  

   :::{figure} figures/at_hand_two  
   :alt: Data to process  
   :width: 400 px  
   :align: left  
   A toy example: removing the row containing the two NaNs yields the largest submatrix, rather than removing the two columns.  

>    :::  

Reviewer 2: These figures are great! But in my opinion, it's not obvious visually which submatrix would be larger.

Would you consider adding the dimensions under the figures? Like:

```text
  [figure1]  [figure2]  [figure3]
__100x10___99x10___100x8__
```

*(sorry for doing this in ASCII art, hopefully the suggestion makes sense 😅 )*

Author: I left these informations in the captions, let me know if this is clear, or not.

   - Compute `hy`: row-wise rightmost NaN index (from the left).  
   - These define the current "NaN frontier" of the matrix.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_0  
   :alt: Step #1 and #2  
   :width: 400 px
   :align: left
   Steps #1 and #2: isolating rows and columns with NaNs and computing `hx` and `hy`.  
   :::  

3. **Permutation Phase**:  
   - Alternately sort rows and columns to push NaN values toward a Pareto frontier.  
   - Even iterations: Sort columns by descending `hx`.  
   - Odd iterations: Sort rows by descending `hy`.  
   - Track all permutations applied during this process.  
   - Repeat until both `hx` and `hy` form non-increasing sequences, indicating an optimal NaN frontier.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_iterations  
   :alt: Permutation steps  
   :width: 800 px
   :align: left
   Three alternate permutations lead to a Pareto frontier of NaNs.  
   :::  

4. **Submatrix Extraction**:  
   - Identify the largest contiguous NaN-free rectangle in the permuted space.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_result_permuted_space  
   :alt: OptiMask result in permuted space  
   :width: 400 px
   :align: left

>    OptiMask result in permuted space: the black-dotted rectangles are candidates for the largest contiguous NaN-free submatrix, with the red-dotted one selected for its maximal area.  

Reviewer 2: Similar comment here... would you consider mentioning the exact dimensions of this example? I understand that these figured were created just as examples, but I think that would help readers' understanding.

For example, it'd be powerful to show something like the following:

* original matrix: `[1000, 100]`
* removing all rows with NaNs: `[900, 100]`
* removing all columns with NaNs: `[1000, 71]`
* OptiMask output: `[950, 91]`

*(I am just making up these numbers to communicate the suggestion, if you agree with this suggestion, you should change them to something that matches the figures)*

Author: I left these informations in the captions, let me know if this is clear, or not.

Reviewer 2: Looks great, thanks for doing that!

   :::  

   - Apply inverse permutations to map back to original row/column indices.  

   :::{figure} figures/algo_result.png
   :alt: OptiMask result  
   :width: 400 px
   :align: left
   OptiMask result: grey indicates missing values, red indicates removed rows and columns, blue marks the computed NaN-free submatrix.  
   :::  

## Python Package  

A Python implementation of the algorithm is available on PyPI (<https://pypi.org/project/optimask/>) and conda-forge (<https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/optimask>).
The library uses Numba [@lam2015numba] for speed and supports common input formats, including NumPy arrays [@harris2020array], pandas DataFrames [@mckinney2010data], and Polars DataFrames [@vink2023polars].  

### Basic Usage  
```python  
import numpy as np  
from optimask import OptiMask  
from optimask.utils import generate_mar  

# Generate a Missing At Random matrix with 2% NaN values  
x = generate_mar(m=100_000, n=1_000, ratio=0.02)  
rows, cols = OptiMask().solve(x)  
np.isnan(x[np.ix_(rows, cols)]).any()  # False  
len(rows), len(cols)  # (38031, 48)  
```  

> This computation takes approximately ~200ms on an average personal computer.

Reviewer 2: It's a little hard to do with an inline code suggestion because of the backticks, but can you please add a blank line before the beginning of the code snippet and another after?

For these reasons: https://yihui.org/en/2021/06/markdown-breath/

The implementation provides the sorted indices of the rows and columns to retain, ensuring that the relative order of the elements is preserved. 

> ### Handling Missing Data for Machine Learning  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Handling Missing Data for Machine Learning

```

Could you please add a newline here, for the reasons from https://yihui.org/en/2021/06/markdown-breath/?

I also found some trailing whitespace. It would be good to do something like "trim trailing whitespace" in your editor. I'm not sure if those trailing spaces will be rendered out, but it'd be good to not even have to think about it.

OptiMask removes missing values (NaN) from datasets while maximizing usable data. It does this by finding an optimal subset of samples (rows) and features (columns) to discard, ensuring the remaining data contains no missing values. This makes the dataset directly usable for machine learning models that require complete data, such as scikit-learn's linear models:

```python  
import numpy as np  
from optimask import OptiMask  
from sklearn.datasets import make_spd_matrix  
from sklearn.linear_model import LinearRegression  

def load_data_with_nan(m, n, nan_ratio):  
    mean = np.random.randn(n + 1)  
    cov = make_spd_matrix(n + 1)  
    data = np.random.multivariate_normal(mean=mean, cov=cov, size=m)  
    mask = np.random.rand(*data.shape) < nan_ratio  
    data[mask] = np.nan  
    return data[:, :-1], data[:, -1]  

# Simulate a dataset with missing values  
X, y = load_data_with_nan(m=10_000, n=100, nan_ratio=0.02)  

# Drop samples where the target (y) is missing  
valid_samples = np.isfinite(y)  
X, y = X[valid_samples], y[valid_samples]  

# Apply OptiMask to remove remaining NaNs  
rows, cols = OptiMask().solve(X)  
X_clean, y_clean = X[np.ix_(rows, cols)], y[rows]

> print(X_clean.shape, y_clean.shape) # (3581, 50) (3581,)

Reviewer 2: These numbers will change slightly when other people run this. I tried myself today and saw:

```text
(3694, 49) (3694,)
```

Would you consider setting a fixed seed all the `np.random` calls so the same pseudo-random numbers are always generated?

There are some docs on this here, in case you haven't seen the latest state of random seed control in `numpy` 2: https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/random/index.html

Author: I have introduced a seed, the snippet is now reproducible.

# Train a model on the NaN-free data  

> model = LinearRegression().fit(X=X_clean, y=y_clean)  

Reviewer 2: I tested this snippet like this (on arm64, macOS). Set up a `conda` env:

```shell
conda create \
    --name optimask-dev \
    -c conda-forge \
    --yes \
        python=3.12 \
        optimask \
        scikit-learn

source activate optimask-dev
```

Then ran this snippet.

All worked great!!! I think this is sufficient to show how to use the output of `Optimask`. Thanks for doing this.

```  

> By strategically selecting which rows and columns to keep, OptiMask ensures the dataset remains meaningful while becoming fully trainable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By strategically selecting which rows and columns to keep, OptiMask preserves more of the input data than other approaches, improving the ability of machine learning models to learn meaningful relationships.
```

Would you consider a rewrite similar to this? Saying that "the dataset [is] trainable" is a bit unclear.

## Conclusion

> OptiMask provides a scalable heuristic for finding the largest NaN-free submatrix in large datasets where exact methods like linear programming become computationally impractical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OptiMask provides a heuristic for finding the largest NaN-free submatrix in large datasets where exact methods like linear programming become computationally impractical.
```

I think it would be ok to remove the word "scalable" here... 2 sentences later, you say that it works efficiently "even for big matrices". I like that description more than the word "scalable", because it's a bit clearer and more direct.

This is a VERY minor suggestion, do whatever you'd like with it.

### Linear Programming Formulation

The problem can be formulated using integer linear programming [@wolsey2020integer], defining decision variables for removing rows, columns, and individual cells, subject to constraints ensuring all NaN values are handled.
The objective is to minimize the total number of effectively removed cells, equivalent to maximizing the area of the remaining NaN-free submatrix.

**Given:**

- A matrix $A$ of shape $m \times n$ with elements $a_{i,j}$.
- Decision variables for $i \in \{1, \dots, m\}$ and $j \in \{1, \dots, n\}$:
  - $r_i \in \{0,1\}$: 1 if row $i$ is removed, 0 otherwise.
  - $c_j \in \{0,1\}$: 1 if column $j$ is removed, 0 otherwise.
  - $e_{i,j} \in \{0,1\}$: 1 if cell $(i,j)$ is effectively removed (i.e., part of a removed row or column), 0 otherwise.

**Constraints:**

For all $i \in \{1, \dots, m\}$ and $j \in \{1, \dots, n\}$:

- If $a_{i,j}$ is NaN, then $e_{i,j} = 1$.
- $r_i + c_j \geq e_{i,j}$.
- $e_{i,j} \geq r_i$.
- $e_{i,j} \geq c_j$.

**Objective Function:**

Minimize the total number of effectively removed cells:

$$
\min \sum_{i=1}^{m} \sum_{j=1}^{n} e_{i,j}
$$

> This formulation can be solved using integer linear programming solvers (e.g., GLPK [@makhorin2012glpk], Gurobi [@gurobi2023gurobi], CPLEX [@cplex2009v12]), often interfaced via modeling languages like Pyomo [@hart2017pyomo] or PuLP [@mitchell2011pulp] in Python for data science practioners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This formulation can be solved using integer linear programming solvers (e.g., GLPK [@makhorin2012glpk], Gurobi [@gurobi2023gurobi], CPLEX [@cplex2009v12]), often interfaced via modeling languages like Pyomo [@hart2017pyomo] or PuLP [@mitchell2011pulp] in Python for data science practitioners.
```
Correct a spelling error.
